This is the crux of Episodes 1-3 vs Episodes 4-6.
In episodes 1-3, the Jedi are completely nuts. They've created a galaxy where people who use the force can't have feelings, emotions, or even parents. Those that go against this are hunted down by the Jedi. I imagine this all stems from the great war referenced to have happened a thousand years prior. The Jedi had their 9/11 where a bunch of force users created all sorts of levels of chaos, which made them so desperate to avoid a repeat incident that they wanted to control all force users. They would literally take them away from their parents and force them into an isolated brain washing facility on Coruscant. Similar to how we now check people's shoes at airports and invaded a country that had no weapons of mass destruction after 9/11.
The Sith, almost out of necessity, took an extreme opposing view to counteract the tyranny of the Jedi. This is where Anakin comes in, created from the force itself (referenced in Episode III when Palpatine talked about his master Darth Plagueis using the force to create life, aka fatherless Anakin) as the ultimate weapon to destroy the Jedi. The Jedi believe "the chosen one" is there to end the tyranny of the Sith, not realizing that true balance of the force would mean the annihilation of the Jedi (in their current state) and the Sith. Qui-gon, in Episode I, makes it clear to Obi-wan that he has issues with the Jedi Order and how they operate. It's assumed that Qui-gon broke the rules of the Jedi and explored a path of the force he was not allowed to explore, this is what led to his discovery of how to return from the afterlife. Qui-gon tries to communicate with Yoda, but Yoda is not able/ready to hear what Qui-gon is trying to tell him, not until after he loses to Palpatine. After Yoda finally listens to Qui-gon and understands what "balance" actually means, Yoda passes this information on to Obi-wan (end of Episode III). This is why when Yoda and Obi-wan are trying to work with Luke, they understand that they must change the ways of the Jedi, change what it means to be a Jedi. Luke is told to use emotions and reconnect with his father, two things they would have never previously taught a Jedi. I believe this is what turned Darth Vader, realizing that Luke, while claiming to be a Jedi, was nothing like the Jedi he grew to despise and that this new type of balanced force user was a better future than the path that Palpatine had set before him. Vader, after previously ending the old Jedi Order, then ends the Sith by chucking Palpatine to his death.
The statement Obi-wan made about absolutes was said to showcase just how blind/brainwashed the Jedi were to their own tyranny. They couldn't see the forest through the trees. The Jedi weren't the good guys, they were the other set of bad guys. So when Yoda makes an absolute statement like "do or do not", it's ok, he's pretty much thrown out most of the conventional wisdom of the old Jedi order at this point.